Amen.
Please be seated.
This morning we resume, come back to the book of Joshua.
Joshua chapter 11 is where we will be this morning.
Joshua chapter 11.
Now, just a note before we read God's Word, together next time I have opportunity to preach,
We'll consider chapter 12 and do some rehearsing of the conquest, including re-examining the command to devote destruction all of Canaan.
There's much to rehearse, even as we saw it commanded, and then we saw the command fulfilled or kept.
It's good that we would return to that.
We won't be doing that this morning, but this morning we find before us the conclusion of the conquest
of the Hebrews in the land of Canaan.
In fact, it recounts for us, chapter 11, the northern campaign in the last battles.
And this whole chapter seems to be something of a capstone or even a magnifying of the opposition and threat against the Israelites, which all reveal more and more the might and power of God to overcome his enemies.
That's what's on display in these verses.
God is all powerful, and chapter 11 explores the means through which we benefit the power of God over his enemies, the power of God to provide and to protect the power of God to keep his promises.
I'm gonna tell you the conclusion, the end, before we even really begin, beloved you worship a powerful God.
And I want you to see this in chapter 11.
Before we read God's word, I invite you to pray with me.
Would you pray with me, please?
Oh, God, we do ask that you would grant us all blessings from on high as we come to your word.
Oh, Lord, might we delight this morning that this word is God breathed?
Well, it is profitable for reproof and for correction and for training up of all righteousness.
And Lord, we ask that you would make yourself known in it.
Lord, hide it in our hearts.
Teach us, O Lord, to worship you and to honor you
in order to see you for our powerful and mighty God.
And we pray and ask these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.
This is Joshua chapter 11, God's holy word inspired and fallible and errant.
Perfect.
Let us give ear.
When Jaden, king of Hazer, heard of this, he sent to Joban, king of Madon,
to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Aksheth, and to the kings who were in the northern hill country, and in Araba south of Cenaroth, and in the lowlands, and in Nafrath door on the west, to the Canaanites in the east, and the west, and the Amorites, the Hittites, the Parazites, and the Jebusites in the hill country, and the Hivites under Herman in the land of Misspa,
And they came out with all their troops, a great horde, and number like the sand that is on the seashore, with very many horses and chariots.
And all these kings joined their forces and came and camped together at the waters of Merum to fight against Israel.
And the Lord said to Joshua, do not be afraid of them.
For tomorrow at this time, I will give over all of them
slain to Israel.
You shall hamstring their horses and burn their chariots with fire.
And so Joshua and all his warriors came suddenly against them by the waters of barum and fell upon them.
And the Lord gave them into the hand of Israel, who struck them and chased them as far as great side on, and miss Raphoth, Mayim, and eastward, as far as the valley of Misfa.
And they struck them until he left none remaining.
And Joshua did to them
Just as the Lord said to him, he hamstrung their horses and burned their chariots with fire.
And Joshua turned back at that time and captured Hazer and struck its king with a sword for Hazer formerly was the head of all those kingdoms.
And they struck with a sword all who were in it, devoting them to destruction.
There was none left that breathed.
And he burned Hazer with fire.
and all the cities of those kings and all their kings, Joshua captured and struck them with the edge of the sword, devoting them to destruction just as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded.
But none of the cities that stood on mounds did Israel burn, except Hazor alone, that Joshua burned, and all the spoil of these cities and livestock the people of Israel took for their plunder.
But every person they struck with the edge of the sword until they had destroyed them and they did not leave any
Just as the Lord had commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did.
And he left nothing undone that all the Lord had commanded Moses.
So Joshua took all that land, the hill country, and all the Neged, and all the land of Goshen, and the low land, and the Arabah, and the hill country of Israel, and its low land from Mount Halek, which rises towards Seir,
as far as Baal, God, in the land of Lebanon, below Mount Herman.
And he captured all their kings and struck them and put them to death.
Joshua made war a long time with all those kings, and there was not a city that made peace with the people of Israel except the Hivites, the inhabitants of Gibeon.
They took them all in battle.
For it was the Lord's doing to harden their hearts that they should come against Israel in battle.
in order that they should be devoted to destruction and should receive no mercy but be destroyed, just as the Lord commanded Moses.
And Joshua came at that time and cut off the anachim from the hill country, from Hebron, from Debeir, from Anad, and from all the hill country of Judah, and from all the hill country of Israel.
Joshua devoted them to destruction with their cities, and there was none of the anachim left in the land of the people of Israel.
only in Gaza, in Gath, in Ashtah to some remain.
So Joshua took the whole land according to all that the Lord had spoken to Moses.
And Joshua gave it for an inheritance to Israel according to their tribal allotments.
And the land had rest from war.
The grass blithers and the flower falls.
The word of our God stands forever and ever.
Thanks be to God.
Just wanna ease your concern before we jump into this chapter.
I promise you, I'm not gonna give you a geography lesson from chapter 11.
But I do want you to see from this passage.
First is we find the power of God's enemies is perceived.
The power of God's enemies is perceived.
For verses one through five read as a rehearsal of the strength and might of the people of Northern Canaan.
And yet again, we read of a coalition of sorts led by Jabin, King of Hazor, who drums up an alliance to stand against the Hebrews and their continued march through the land.
This confederation sought to prevent Joshua from advancing into the Jezreel Valley and beyond.
Hazor was the largest city of Canaan, thought to have spanned some 200 acres and boasted a population of 15,000
One commentator notes proportionally speaking, meaning in relation to the rest of the Promised Land, Hazer would have been comparable to a modern metropolis like Chicago or New York.
And among all the cities and kings who joined this confederation, there would have been many infantry, many horses, many chariots in a climactic manner, verse five reads, and all these kings, which are numbered like the sand, their peoples,
All these kings joined their forces and came and encamped together at the waters of Meram to fight against Israel.
With interests aligned and a common defense of the land as their goal, this shapes up to be an incredibly formidable enemy.
And in some ways, the fact that there are five verses granted to detailing the opposition of God's people is to show us that the Hebrews
that the Hebrews were not facing some ragtag backwoods force, but an army, and an impressive one at that.
In fact, in comparison to the Northern Confederation, the Hebrews were the ragtag backwoods force.
And yet in terms of size, might, and ability to wage war, this Northern United Front is no match for the mighty arm of the Lord.
And it could be that the intent of the author is only to magnify God's power over the mighty kings and nations of the earth.
For what this is is power perceived and perceived by sight.
The Hebrews by earthly standards should have been no match for this coalition.
And it's the Lord who shows himself to be almighty and powerful over even the mightiest kings and nations of the earth.
See the proper perspective
is necessary here because the Northern Coalition is strong and is mighty by worldly standards.
Only as strong as they are, the Lord is stronger.
This account only magnifies it.
And it forces you and I to consider how we perceive strength, whether by sight or by faith.
George Shea may not be a household name,
but he's most notable for being the master of ceremonies of the Nathan's famous 4th of July hot dog eating contest.
Which you've ever seen, you know that it has a way of sticking with you.
You can't unsee a hot dog eating contest.
He's known as one of the last great carnival promoters, and he's garnered quite a reputation with his dramatic, hyperbolic, and sometimes poetic introductions of competitive eaters.
In 2016, he said of Joey Chestnut,
Imagine the backdrop as Baba O'Reilly is fluttering in the background.
He says this of Joey Chestnut in a world of nothing, of barren hills and cracked earth and once proud oceans drained to sand, there will still be a monument to his existence, bleached by the sun, perhaps and blunted by time, but everlasting.
because this man represents all that is eternal in human experience.
Through the curtain of the aura, a comet blazes to herald his arrival, and his victory shall be transcribed into every language known to history, including Klingon.
It's ridiculous, isn't it?
To hear this said of anyone, let alone a competitive eater, Joey Chestnut, no matter how many hot dogs he could eat in a given time.
And while it may be impressive, again, that someone can eat 30 plus hot dogs in a short amount of time, such words are meaningless.
And the first five verses read something like a George Shay introduction.
They have the appearance of might and power, but they are empty and hollow before the might and power of our God.
And so we ponder the question, what does it mean to walk or even war?
by faith and not by sight.
But it means to take God at His Word and to trust His promises.
It means to recount the testimonies of God's faithfulness and to remember all the times that He has shown Himself to be faithful and true.
It means to dwell upon who God is and how He has revealed Himself to us in His Word, by His law, and most gloriously in His Son, Jesus Christ.
Does not death
seem formidable?
Does not sin seem insurmountable?
Does not Satan and his fiery darts and his lies and deception, his temptations seem strong and mighty?
In many ways, I believe the Lord and his infinite wisdom orchestrates history itself to underscore
His might not only earthly kingdoms, but over death itself, over indwelling sin and over Satan.
And it's through this perception living by faith and not by side that we wonder at the ministry of Jesus and that ministry of humility, of faithfulness, and even suffering and death that God might display His power and might.
And Christ is so exalted unto glory.
Our greatest enemies are but empty before the power of God.
And anything mighty we may save them, there's nothing more than the hawking of a carnival promoter.
Secondly, what I want you to see this morning, the power of God's might applied.
Okay, the power of God's might applied.
In 1986, there was a world cut match between Argentina and England,
soccer or football legend Diego Maradana scored a goal by striking the ball, not with his head, but actually with his hand.
If you know this about soccer, you can't do that.
The ref didn't see it.
And so the goal counted for Argentina in a World Cup match.
After the game, Maradana said it was scored a little with the head of Maradana and a little with the hand of God.
Is this how we're to think of Israel laying conquest to Canaan?
Or are we to think of our own living in the power of Yahweh, a little bit of me, and a little bit of God?
When the face of perceived strength, the Lord shows forth His might and power to use little old Israel to defeat King Jacob and his coalition of the northern kingdom.
And the Lord reassures Joshua and reminds him of his promise.
He says, do not be afraid of them.
Do not be afraid of them.
For tomorrow at this time, I will give over all of them slain to Israel.
You shall hamstring their horses and burn their chariots with fire."
And so we are reminded that it's not only by Israel's strength that the northern kingdoms are defeated, but it's the Lord gives them over as if slain already, the deed as if it's already done.
Now, with this northern engagement, it would seem that this threat against Israel again has been magnified.
For here, not only are there great numbers facing God's people, but there are powerful weapons of war, chariots, and cavalry.
And I think we're supposed to note this.
Boys himself notes from the historian, Josephus, that he records the Canaanite forces 300,000 foot soldiers, 100,000 cavalry, and 20,000 chariots.
And even if his numbers are approximate, this is intimidating to say the least.
And all the more so as this is the first instance recorded in Joshua's campaign that they would face such weapons of warfare.
But in the light of this, again, the Lord reassures his people.
And I don't want you to miss the implication of his instruction here because it's very specific.
He commands them to hamstring their horses and to burn their chairs with fire.
And what do the Israelites do?
Well, Joshua and all his warriors came suddenly against them by the waters of Aram and fell upon them.
They came upon them suddenly.
Could very well mean that they launched a surprise attack against them by night.
But notice that God's promise to defeat their enemies was not devoid of human activity.
God's promise to defeat their enemies was not devoid
of human activity.
In fact, we should understand that the Israelites are the tools that God would use to bring about their destruction.
Or as Dale Ralph Davis says it, and much better than I can, mind you, he says, divine sovereignty does not negate human activity but stimulates it.
Divine sovereignty does not negate human activity but stimulates it.
What motivates us to do what we do and live as we live and work as we work and worship as we worship, isn't it that God is sovereign and in control?
He goes on to say, we frequently look at the teaching of divine sovereignty too simplistically.
Some will allege that if God ordains something a certain, it renders human effort irrelevant.
Let go and let God.
But Joshua knew better.
His view was not to let go, but to grab hold.
Divine sovereignty creates confidence, which calls forth our effort even to the point of reckless abandon, i.e.
a smaller force going against a larger force.
God's sovereignty is not a doctrine that shackles us, but a reality that liberates us.
Not something that stifles, but an elixir that invigorates.
Leave it to Dale Ralph Davis, too so poetically and beautifully harmonize the compatibility of God's sovereignty and human activity.
But you see the point, don't you?
That God's power is applied here, and it is done so by faith.
Why would anyone, for example, jump out of a perfectly functioning airplane at 10,000 feet, going 100 miles an hour, if not for a parachute strapped to their back?
And why would an inferior force, as the Israelites were, attack a significantly superior force, if not for the fact, that God was powerful to keep His promise?
That He is in fact sovereign.
And so even in the Lord's instructions, there is an implicit call or command to lean upon the Lord alone and to trust in His might alone.
Their hope is not in greater weapons of warfare, but in the Lord who defeats all of His enemies.
Consider what God commands of you.
to love the Lord with all your heart, soul, mind, and strength in your neighbor as yourself.
To be kind to one another, tender-hearted, forgiving one another as Christ has forgiven you, or God in Christ forgave you.
Love one another with brotherly love, outdo one another in showing honor.
Let every person be subject to the governing authorities
For there is no authority except from God and those that exist have been instituted by God.
You see, resting upon the Lord's sovereignty isn't only for days of battle and for war, but it's a daily reality and such a reminder that we live each day and we seek to live in Christ each day as the Lord rules, reigns, and so sovereignly executes all of His decrees.
You see, a sovereignty is not reserved only for the battlefield, but in every trial,
and every circumstance, even the mundane and ordinary.
It's what should lead us to walk by faith, to be sanctified in the Spirit, and to grow in our knowledge of the Lord, to worship Him alone, and to be such a salt and light to the world around us.
Thirdly, what you see from this passage is the means of God's power.
The means of God's power.
Now Israel succeeds by doing as the Lord commands, and so they hamstring the horses and set fire to the chariots.
And this is not merely tactically sound, but it's also, I think, spiritually poignant.
For it's not these methods of warfare which you and I should trust.
It's not these methods of warfare in which you and I should trust.
not as if the Hebrews were skilled and knowledgeable in these methods of warfare anyway, but it's not as if they should raid the armory here and use the weapons against Jabin of the Northern coalition.
But nonetheless, it's a stark reminder to us that strength resides in the Lord and not in us.
Now, we read that Joshua lays waste to Hazor and devotes into destruction, and with verse 15, the conquest comes to an end.
I think it's poignant that we consider the conclusion of this campaign in verse 15,
Just as the Lord had commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did.
He left nothing undone of all the Lord had commanded Moses.
And it's here I think we should pause and consider the means of God's power, which is faithfulness to God's commands.
The means of God's power is the faithfulness to God's commands.
We saw the application of God's power in acting and doing,
But here, we're reminded of what exactly they're acting upon.
But what verse 15 calls us to do is consider how Joshua, I think, is the servant of the Lord, after the likeness of Moses, as God has commanded.
He is God's model servant.
And again, as Davis notes, this stands as a witness to Israel's future leaders and kings and to individual Israelites, that what marks a model leader is not the size of his chariot force, it's not the numbers of females and his harem, it's not the presence of peacocks in the royal zoo, but an obedience to God's commandments that leads God's people to be faithful.
The means of God's power is faithfulness to his commandments.
And this stands as a case study to the likes of Deuteronomy 28, the obeying of the commandments of the Lord leads to covenant blessing, which includes victory over God's enemies, but also a land flowing with milk and honey.
But do you believe this, that obeying the commandments leads to blessing?
that God's ways are the means by which we are most gloriously blessed and the ways that we know the power of God most gloriously displayed in our lives.
That we might heed the call of Jeremiah to stand by the roads and look and ask for the ancient paths where the good way is and walk in it and find rest for your souls.
You see, I fear we struggle with the apparent disassociation between the likes of Deuteronomy 28 and our own experience regarding seeking Christ and obeying His commandments.
For Deuteronomy 28, if you were to read it, especially the blessings portion, reads like a utopian paradise.
The passage is filled with abundance and success and victory and renown.
And yet we don't necessarily experience that when we follow God's commands, do we?
Perhaps we lose friends when we follow not their path or warn them of the heirs of their ways.
Perhaps we lose income when we honor the Lord's Day and keep it holy or we practice God honoring in honest business practices.
We know we forgive others, we serve others and love others and yet we still know the sting of broken relationships.
We know betrayal or we've been sinned against.
We deny the flesh or reorient our priorities or sacrificially give and sometimes we're left wondering what do we have to show for it.
See, oftentimes our remaining faithful to the Lord doesn't appear to achieve some sort of glorified success or abundance or victory or renown.
And I think when we begin here, when this is our heart attitude, I think we end up missing the point of faithfulness and of covenant blessing.
And I think verse 15 gives us some indication at an answer for us all.
For what do Moses and Joshua and David
In Zerubbabel, don't forget him and Nehemiah and the like all have in common.
Well, they are all patterns of the Lord's servant who points us to the greater servant in Christ Jesus.
For wasn't it Christ who said, I have come down from having not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me?
My food is to do the will of him who sent me to accomplish his work
Wasn't it Christ through a big Satan saying, Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word that comes from the mouth of the Father?
And you shall worship the Lord, your God, and Him only shall you serve?
Wasn't it Christ who said, I always do what pleases Him the Father?
The faithfulness of Joshua points us to the greater faithfulness of Christ, who secures us not a land
flowing with milk and honey, but the land flowing with milk and honey, who delivers us safe to gain inside, in whom we can sing the words, I am bound for the promised land.
And if it's faithfulness that grants us blessing, what do we make of Christ's life on earth?
Betrayed, doubted, mocked, beaten, and killed.
That's what faithfulness got him.
Right?
This is surely instruction for the Christian to live faithfully and to delight in the law of the Lord.
Don't get me wrong, right?
We should be faithful unto the Lord and seek to walk in His commandments.
But we are to see the means of blessing here as eternal and eschatological, right?
Meaning a time to come that is not yet come when God comes again at the end times, we might say, on the last days.
on the last day.
Such blessings may be sparse this side of glory, but we need to be reminded that they are abundant on the other side of glory with Christ.
And they will be known on ending forever when Christ comes again to make all things new.
For it is Christ who both obeyed the Lord and did all the covenant required and took the curse on our behalf, that we might long for the day that is coming when we receive all blessings eternally.
in unending.
Now, lastly, we see God's power accomplished.
We're going to come back to some of this next time to preach, but God's power accomplished.
From verses 16 to 23, there is a rehearsal, broadly speaking, of the whole conquest.
And it's a glorious thing for us to behold the power of God to keep His word.
For thus far, we've been anticipating this text, haven't we?
Well, not yet having arrived.
We've walked with the Israelites from the other side of the Jordan, wondering if the trans-Jordanian tribes would keep their word.
To the parting of the Jordan River, to the erection of memorials and of altars, the worshiping of God's people and the promised land.
The presence of Christ, the commander of the Lord's army.
We've seen the fall of Jericho and the sin of A. Ken at I and Israel's repentance, the Gibbinite deception and the southern campaign, the sun standing still, and now the northern campaign.
finished, the land has been conquered."
And God powerfully kept his promise as Joshua was faithful.
Now, most likely, you knew how this ended, didn't you?
Did you know how this story comes to a conclusion?
Perhaps some of the thunder is robbed from these passages since we know how it ends.
But might the Spirit this morning impress upon us the same wonder and reverence of Joshua and God's people at the end of verse 23.
For there is a deep beauty here that we have persevered or preserved for us this clear display of God's power to overcome his and our enemies and to preserve and to provide for his people.
And God's divinely inspired word is a testimony to his faithfulness.
And that's what the book of Joshua is.
You may know this or may not know this, and I'm not suggesting anyone do this.
Let me give that caveat.
But over the last decade or so, there's been a rise in people lying on their resumes and doing so with some ingenuity.
Someone applying for a job or something like a management position
might list a date range of managerial service in their job history at a place like Circuit City.
I don't know if you remember Circuit Cities, maybe you don't.
They probably closed down before many of you were born.
But here's the thing is that they are now defunct and they are closed and they are no longer in business.
And the idea goes that something like you can't, no one can track down a reference for someone who worked at Circuit City.
This idea of kind of patting their resume with something that can't be verified.
The idea is who they're going to call.
There's no corporate office.
There's no store.
There's no paper trail that would say anything other than what you might list on your resume.
In fact, they could work with someone else and list a different phone number to give a fake and a bogus recommendation.
Who's going to know any different?
But I want you to see the opposite is what's taking place here in Joshua 11.
God is establishing for us
And for his own glory and his own might and power to do all that he has said, he is showing us that he is faithful to keep his promises.
And when we trace these instances through the Old Testament, we're seeing it in time and time and time and time again that God is faithful to his word.
And so he has made a promise to you, hasn't he?
That he will never leave you nor forsake you.
to redeem you by the blood of his own son, that he will come again in all power and in all glory to judge the world and receive his people into an everlasting kingdom.
And so beloved, we can take him at his word.
And while we have not yet received this eternal promise, we also have.
And Joshua gives us with greater definition a glimpse into God's faithfulness to do all things powerfully.
I told you at the beginning, I was going to tell you how this ends.
Beloved, you worship a powerful God.
Don't forget this.
Let it inform even your prayers.
Let it inform even your worship and your love for God.
It might be what we even delight in even now.
Let's pray together.
Father, I thank You that You have made Yourself known and have done so gloriously, O Lord, that You have littered for us through the Scriptures these instances and these recountings of Your faithfulness.
And so, Lord, it might be that that would inform us.
When we doubt and when we know fears and worries and anxieties, might we recount all that You have done?
It might inform our faith.
and got my spirit applied to our hearts.
Indeed, might it even inform our minds as we pray and as we look to you and say that you can do far more abundantly than we can ask or think, according to your will, according to your strength, according to your decree, according to your goodness, and not ours.
So Father, help us to believe and to lean upon you in faith.
We ask these things in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Let's stand together and sing.